2014-04-23
- skill-learn-3 faulty testing session.

Our discussion
(1) Tinker with expts 2 and 4 to get more convincing results out of them, which could amount to simply running them with more subjects.  

For expt 4 (learning stimulus-response association to cues that follow
the target), I have fewer ideas.

I think it would be useful to try to magnify the strength of the
effect, and I suggest we do this by making people respond faster --
e.g., within 400 msec -- to push the slight RT effect into an accuracy
effect. We could add two more conditions to this that have +600/-600
pre-cueing but also add a secondary task, as Tim suggests, to provide
some plausible explanation for why the colored backgrounds appear at
all.

Reviews:


Your introduction seems cursory (rather than concise); 
methods are insufficiently described; 
Exps 1 and 3 are essentially pilot experiments for Experiments 2 and 4 and, given the weaknesses you yourselves identify, it is not clear that their inclusion adds
value; 
analysis and presentation of the results of Experiments 2 and 4 are
insufficient. 
Most important, although you do in the Discussion relate your
findings to some literature on implicit and associative learning, there is much
that is missing in this survey: your finding of incidental/effortless S-R
learning in this paradigm seems neither as novel nor as heterodox in relation to
current theories as you appear to be claiming.

In your (unusually brief) introduction , you appear to assert that the interest
of the incidental learning that you demonstrate in this paper is that it is in
counterpoint to a general assumption that all learning is effortful and/or
requires intention. This is surely far from the general assumption in
contemporary psychology. The reviewers nominate some examples to the contrary.
More generally there is a strong associationist/connectionist tradition that
views the brain as a dumb learning machine that automatically associates
whatever elements it encounters, without any particular effort or intention
(other than perhaps attention) whether to form abstract representations of
categories, or learn words, or to learn sequences (as mentioned by a couple of
reviewers) or to bind together elements of an episode (including response), as
in theories of event-coding (Hommel et al), or in Logan (1988)-type theories of
automatization of response generation. Note that the last two of these are
explicitly theories about associations between stimulus elements and responses. 

The elements in your Experiments 1 and 2 that the participant apparently learns
to associate to the response are not irrelevant to their task. The participant
must attend to the letter/symbol as a signal to initiate the response even when
it is completely predictable. And the letter/symbol is a valid predictor of the
response. Who would predict that one would not learn something about that
relationship (if less than when there is no other predictor)?

Exp 1 compares the later performance of people trained in the easy conditions of
Exp 1 to the early performance of the difficult group. As you point out
yourself, this is an inappropriate comparison, because of all the other ways in
which performance may benefit from practice. It is unclear why you included this
experiment.

The "easy-negative" condition of Exp 2 is inadequately described: was the
incorrect pairing of symbol to response in the "easy negative" condition
consistent? I assume it was, or there would be nothing to learn for the transfer
test. Was the symbol presented in the same locus as the digit? If the symbol was
thus (additionally) predictive of the correct response, and presented at the
focus of attention, who would not predict some learning, albeit less that in the
difficult condition (due to blocking - see Reviewer 1)?

Exp 3. As the reviewers note, this experiment seems an imperfect pilot to Exp 4;
why include it? The description of the methods for this experiment (and hence
Exp 4 also) is again substandard. What are the visual characteristics (size?
position? colour?) of these symbols and background cues? Did the stimulus
replace the pre-cue, or was it superimposed? Did the postcue appear behind the
stimulus, or replace it? Feedback? Intertrial interval?

Exp 4. The hot news here, apparently, is that there was evidence of some
learning of 90% valid cue-response relations even when the cue followed the
response. You consider that finding learning under these conditions challenges
the contiguity principle. An assumption you appear to be making is that response
selection and execution stops the instant one presses a response key, and hence
that no response representation is still available for formation of associations
to the cue that then appears. However, everything we know about performance
monitoring (e.g. the fact that subjects detect many of their own errors in RT
experiments) suggests that response selection is still being computed or checked
well beyond the execution of a response. So the temporal spread of the "response
trace" available for association is not perhaps as limited as you assume. Also,
I seem to recall that transient effects of associative priming from response
effects have been found even though the effect follows the response, suggesting
bidirectional associations (Hommel); I don't know if anyone has looked at
longer-term effects of cumulative learning of this kind.

I hope you find this feedback, critical though a lot of it is, useful as you
take this potentially interesting work forward.

With best wishes

Stephen Monsell 
Associate Editor, JEP:G

Please visit the following address to acknowledge receipt of this letter: 
http://www.jbo.com/jbo3/B.cfm?id=126542&cid=914386

REVIEWS

Reviewer 1

Review of MS. 2009-0418 for JEP:Gen
Plenty of gain with minimal pain: Learning cues to actions without trying

By: Edward Vul, Timothy Rickard and Harold Pashler

This paper makes the interesting claim that learning can take place when a cue
is paired with an action induced by something other than the cue. The effect is
for the cue to come to prime the action. A series of four experiments are used
to gradually demonstrate the basic effect, and to show that it is not due to
simple motor facilitation (if the cue primes the wrong response then it has a
detrimental effect on performance). Evidence is also presented that the cue can
actually come after the induced action and yet some learning of the cue-action
relationship is learned. The finding is discussed in the context of other
paradigms, notably the Kamin blocking effect and backward conditioning
preparations, which seem to provide quite contradictory evidence with regard to
the incidental cue-outcome learning demonstrated in this paper.

Let me say straight away that these are potentially interesting findings. The
first question I would ask is whether the paper is suitable for JEP:General, and
in this case I think a lot would be gained by transferring to another journal,
specifically JEP:ABP. Whilst JEP:LMC might also have been thought a suitable
alternative (and this plurality of alternatives may have been the rationale
behind submitting to General in the first place), there is no doubt in my mind
that Animal Behavior Processes is the right home for this paper. The key thing
is that the Editor and reviewers for that journal would be best placed to assess
its merits, particularly the current Editor. I suspect that there is a lot of
material that a scholar of associative learning could bring to bear in
discussing these results which go far beyond the discussion offered in the paper
and would bring out what was genuinely novel and what was not. I also believe
that ABP would target the correct audience. 

The next issue is whether the results in this paper are secure. The first thing
to say about this is that the (quite understandable) desire to be economical
with the controls and make the early training data for the difficult condition
serve this purpose was misplaced. A control, which was given equivalent training
to that used in the experimental conditions but employed different stimuli and
responses, and was then transferred to the common test phase would have allowed
us to gain some sense of how much had been learned in all conditions. As it is,
the results of Experiment 1 are hard to interpret, and the use of 1-tail tests
is hard to justify here. Experiment 2 goes some way to addressing this point, it
replicates some of the effects found in Experiment 1 and shows that an
inappropriate S-R mapping slows performance on test (slows it more) when
compared to the appropriate mapping. This is a key result and I'd have liked a
more detailed analysis of it - we only get some comparisons. Is the Easy
Negative condition slower than control on test? It would be good to have a
proper control, but is it worse than the initial blocks of the Difficult
condition? We are only given the one comparison between Easy Negative and Easy
Positive - this is not enough to understand the patterns in the data. We need to
know if the effect on Easy Negative is to simply leave things as though no
training had taken place, or to make things worse than if no training had taken
place.

Turning to the Easy Positive condition, we are told that in the first test block
it was slower than the Difficult condition, indicating that being trained on the
mappings all along, rather than just experiencing stimulus with response (the
response being induced or specified by another stimulus), is a more effective
procedure. This replicates a finding of Experiment 1, and would seem a good
point at which to discuss blocking. The author's discuss blocking later, state
quite correctly that it implies that simple contiguity is not enough to
guarantee learning and point out that their results contradict this claim. They
do not. Blocking has an A+, AB+ design, and learning to B will be weaker than in
a suitable control (A, AB+ has been used, where A denotes simple exposure, or
C+, AB+ can be employed). In these experiments a stimulus (typically a digit) is
used as A, and the fact that we can instruct participants that this digit maps
onto a specific key (1 is the first key etc) means that in effect the
pre-training of A+ has already been done. Then the trials are effectively
digit+symbol leads to response. We would expect the digit to block the symbol.
It does, and so there is nothing here to contradict blocking (i.e. Easy Positive
worse on first test trial than Difficult). The fact that there is some learning
to the symbol is not surprising in itself - blocking is typically not complete.
In fact, this is one of the better demonstrations of blocking that I've seen!

As the authors note, a somewhat severe interpretation of Experiment 3 is that it
is flawed by the guessing test (which is explicit training), which leaves the
results of Experiment 4 to really carry this part of the paper. Unfortunately
these are quite a bit weaker than Experiment 3 (this always seems to happen!).
In particular, there seems to be a hint of disagreement between the effect for
Rts and Errors for the crucial +600 condition. Hence the claim could be made
that the evidence for learning when the stimulus came after the response is not
secure. On this point, it's good to have the error and RT data - but where were
the errors for the earlier experiments?

My feeling is that these points could be dealt with in part by more detailed
analysis and by running suitable controls and by replicating Experiments 2 and
4. If this were done, then we might have something suitable for publication.


Reviewer 2

The authors report four experiments testing the possibility of incidental
stimulus-response learning. In the first experiment, letters were presented
visually and were mapped onto specific responses. In four conditions, subjects
either always needed to rely on the letter to respond, sometimes needed to rely
on the letter to respond (the previous response often repeated), or never needed
to rely on the letter to respond (the response was always the same, or the
response was pre-cued). Performance in a transfer test in which the letters were
needed revealed learning in all conditions. In the second experiment, the
authors demonstrated that presenting symbols that do not match the required
response in the pre-cued training condition led to slowed (correct) responses to
symbols at test. The third and fourth experiments demonstrated that an
irrelevant symbol presented following a response can nevertheless be tied to
that response, and facilitate responses at test. These results provide robust
evidence that stimulus-response pairings can be learned observationally, without
ever having required a response to the stimulus.

This paper convincingly demonstrates an interesting and novel effect. The
experiments are clever and well-designed (although Experiment 3 has little
utility beyond a replication). The writing is clear and engaging, and the
discussion draws interesting connections with diverse literatures. There is
little to quibble with in terms of the design and analysis of the experiments,
but where the manuscript is currently lacking is in the framing and
interpretation of the study. Several comments are provided below.

First, the paper and general research question are framed as highly original,
both in the global sense of the role of effort/deliberation in learning, and in
the local sense of incidental learning of task-irrelevant cues. There is some
truth in the details, but these general areas of research have long and
worthwhile histories. For example, early research on artificial grammar learning
revealed that effort was not only unnecessary (as reported here), but actually
hurts performance (Reber, 1976, JEP:HLM). Moreover, the necessity of
stimulus-based response selection for learning has been studied extensively in
the domain of sequence learning. For example, a sequence of irrelevant spatial
locations can be learned while subjects respond to the identity of objects that
follow their own uncorrelated order (Mayr, 1996, JEP:LMC). While these papers
temper some of the novelty of this work, the paper would nevertheless benefit
from being better situated in (and motivated by) past work.

Relatedly, the goal of looking at the necessity of "deliberate effort" in
stimulus-response learning seemed a little odd. In particular, it's unclear what
exactly is meant by effort -- or rather, whether 'effort' is the best way to
characterize the difference between conditions. Consider Experiment 2 in which
differences in RT are observed during training, and provide a possible signature
of difficulty. The task is essentially the same, however, for the hard and easy
conditions: select a response on the basis of some cue (a symbol or a digit),
and respond when the symbol appears. The RT differences thus reflect the advance
preparation in the digit case. Arguably, the cue identification is also harder
in the symbol case, but it would seem worth manipulating that variable (by
degrading some symbols) in one wanted to make that claim. Nevertheless, the
important point is that something is different in these cases (especially in the
later post-cuing experiments): response selection depends on the symbols in one
case and not the other, but subsequent symbol-based response selection at test
is facilitated in both cases. This is a neat finding that would be better
characterized in operational terms than by "effort", which connotes an
inaccurate sense of exertion.

Moreover, what can be concluded from the finding that incidental
stimulus-response learning can occur? The authors properly urge caution is
concluding that incidental learning is as good as deliberate learning. But such
consideration implies that learning occurs over a continuum, with deliberate
leading to a lot, and incidental leading to the same amount or less. However,
the measure of learning is somewhat agnostic about two aspects of learning that
seem important for interpreting the results. First, it is unclear whether
learning of stimulus-response pairs occurs in the same way for task-relevant and
incidental acquisition -- in the simplest sense, the timecourses of learning may
differ. Second, it is unclear whether, despite equivalent facilitation at test,
the knowledge acquired deliberately vs. incidentally is the same -- one could
imaging that deliberate S-R learning is directional, but that incidental
learning over various temporal asynchronies is more abstract (e.g., does making
a response visually prime the corresponding symbol?). The authors would
acknowledge these unknowns, as they do in terms of durability on page 14, but
those sections could be expanded.

Attempting to interpret the results from the perspective of learning theory was
worthwhile, and blocking certainly is an example of the insufficiency of
contiguity per se. In this context, the finding that cognitive load reduces
blocking (De Houwer & Beckers, 2003, QJEP), may bolster discussion about a
dissociation between knowledge and performance.

Why was the explicit guessing test interspersed between the training and
transfer test in Experiment 3? As the authors note, this may have induced
unwanted strategies in the transfer test (although it is unclear how any
correlations could be learned during the transfer test as claimed on page 12,
given that the cues were un-predictive). Regardless, if the authors choose to
report this experiment (which seems redundant with Experiment 4), it would be
worth reporting the results of the explicit guessing test.

The figure labels on pages 8 and 9 are wrong.

Reviewer 3

Review of JEP:G 2009-0418

In their manuscript, "Plenty of gain with minimal pain?", Vul, Rickard, and Pashler present data demonstrating that there is some unintentional learning of cue-response relationships without such a relationship being required. Cues were simple stimuli and responses were single key presses. 

First, let me apologize for the negative tone of this review. I had high expectations given the reputation of the authors, but the manuscript fell far short of these expectations. The manuscript read more like a preliminary draft than a paper worthy of publication. 

At the outset, the paper caught me by surprise by having an introduction that was less than one page that included no citations. This was so unusual that I had to verify that the paper had not been submitted as a Brief Report and that the editorial policy for JEP:General had not changed regarding expectations for articles. In sum, the introduction was wholly inadequate for framing the subsequent experiments - there is no "free lunch" when it comes to the effort required to motivate a study before the reader jumps into method sections. Even after I read the introduction of Experiment 1 I was left in the dark regarding the methodology; the manuscript does not describe the "more direct basis for response selection" until the middle of the method section. 

Furthermore, the first experiment lacked statistics and had obvious design flaws. The authors acknowledge those flaws in the introduction to Experiment 2 and run the obvious study to address them, but it made Experiment 1 superfluous. I was also left wondering why only one of the conditions, the pre-cued training, was tested in Experiment 2; were the medium and easy-blocked conditions not run, or were they run and failed to show the anticipated effect? Thus, Experiment 1 should be dropped. Likewise, Experiment 4 makes Experiment 3 unnecessary.

Other oddities arose during the presentation of the results. Why were curves shown for the transfer test in Experiments 1 and 2 (see right side of Figures 1a and 2b and Figures 1b and 2c) but data were collapsed across the transfer test blocks for Experiments 3 and 4? Furthermore, the range of the y-axis scales varied considerably across figures with the most egregious example being Figures 3 and 4 where in the upper left figure the y-axis spans 350 to 750 ms or 800 ms and for the lower left it spans 0 to 600 ms; a similar large discrepancy is present for the accuracy figures. In addition, Figures 3 and 4 were very crowded. 

The General Discussion attempted to correct for the failure to review the literature in the introduction, but the treatment was spotty and shallow. For example, there was no substantive discussion of the implicit learning literature (e.g., Nissen & Bullemer and subsequent treatments) where participants clearly learn stimulus relationships that were not explicitly trained. Furthermore, the animal conditioning research received inadequate treatment. Sensory preconditioning is the clearest example of learning of associations without specific action required. And, Ralph Miller has a long series of rat studies showing the learning of associations that were not explicitly reinforced (see any of the numerous tests of his comparator hypothesis). 

Finally, there was no discussion of how the authors dealt with the non-Gaussian nature of RT data. Were data trimmed, transformed, analyzed non-parametrically, or handled in any other way to produce valid statistical analyses? The very small effect sizes during the transfer test make it imperative that the data were analyzed correctly. The analysis lacked the necessary details to judge their validity (e.g., where did the 190 dfs in the F-test come from - was this a repeated measures ANOVA, multilevel analysis, or something else? Was block used as a covariate?). 

Details: 
On p. 5, the example of "Prepare to make response 4" is nonsensical because this is not one of the legal responses according to the method section.